---
layout: post
title:  "Hacking you bias"
date:   2023-03-20 00:00:00 +0100
categories: bias
tags: reflection personal
comments: true
---

- Bias -> It can be implicit or explicit.
	- Unconscious bias : acknowledge bias and try to challenge it.
		- **micro-behaviors**: These are small, subtle signals that we, often unintentionally, communicate through our body language
- Prejudice : more objective perception tied to higher levels of bias

## Bias and brain
- The **"fast brain"**  organizes information based on intuition and emotional impulses.
   This processing is quick and often effective. Instead of processing all the informational input that is available, our brain takes a shortcut. The "fast brain" uses its memory to make a quick judgement.
- The second system, called the **"slow brain"** is more rational. This system tries to have a better and deeper understanding of the world around us and allows us to have more complex thoughts.
### Action items
-   **Becoming aware**  of how your thoughts, assumptions, beliefs and opinions are formed
-   **Challenging**  your assumptions
-   **Unlearning**  learned behavior
-   **Being open-minded**
-   **Re-framing** accepted opinions and beliefs
-   **Having the courage**  to recognize and change your biases

## Affinity Bias (in-group bias)
Affinity bias describes the unconscious tendency to prefer people who are similar to you in terms of identity traits, interests, experiences and background.
- *mini-me*: unconsciously choosing to work with people who look, think and act like you.
- You form an idea of someone based on the group they belong to. This (often oversimplified) image is projected onto any individual.
- *positive stereotype*: in-group bias  | *negative stereotype*: out-group bias
- Within a team : You and your team get into a comfortable routine, you don't challenge each other, with boredom, demotivation and decreased productivity as a result.
- **Action item** : Look out for micro-affirmations vs micro-aggressions
- **Reflection**: Having less affinity bias would allow teams to explore more ideas and try new aspects, which might be lost when there are in-group biases.

## Confirmation bias
**Confirmation bias**: You focus on information that confirms your existing beliefs.
- **Tunnel vision**: only hearing and seeing what you want to.
- Not actively looking for information that contradicts your opinion or truth | Receive inputs from like minded people | Avoid discussing the topic with people who have opposing views
- Confirmation bias affects our search and interpretation of new information:
	- **We only pay attention to what reinforces our assumptions**.
	- **We overlook new information that differs from our current beliefs**.
- *Reflection* :   When it comes to emotionally charged issues, you are more likely to let confirmation bias influence your opinion about new information.
- **Action Items**:
	- See yourself as forever learning new things. Step away from your identity as "the expert".
	- Dont settle for what you already know and welcome unexpected conclusions.
	- Be open to compromises and finding the best solution.

## Groupthink
**Groupthink**: Even though you have different ideas, you stop thinking critically and agree with the group to help create a "false" feeling of consensus.
 - Groups that prioritize their group identity and behave coldly toward “outsiders”
 - Groupthink offers groups an illusion of consensus. Differences are pushed into the "undercurrent".
 - If groupthink happens often, team members with different ideas might start to act out, (un)consciously boycotting teamwork or tasks.
 ### Red flags to identify
 - The team discussion is dominated by one person who takes over the conversation entirely.
- The group is reaching a consensus really quickly and apparently easily: "we all agree!"

## Gender Bias
- **Gender identity** is each person’s deeply felt internal and individual experience of gender, which may or may not correspond to the sex assigned at birth.
	-   **Gender:** the roles, behaviors, activities, attributes, and opportunities that any society considers appropriate for individuals of a specific sex.
	-   **Biological sex:** the biological and physiological characteristics that define humans as female, male or intersex.
	- it is important to acknowledge that gender identity is a **complex** and **multi-layered**reality.
- Gendered Pronouns
	-  **he/him/his**  for people who identify as men
	-   **she/her/hers**  for people who identify as women
	- A well-known non-binary alternative in English is **they/them/theirs**.
- Gender bias is formed both by societal norms and by individual beliefs about gender roles.

### Job adverts might have latent connotations
Depending on your language and cultural context, words will have a masculine or feminine connotation.

-   **Masculine coded words**: competitive, dominant, challenging, confident, decisive, determined, leader, independent, objective.
-   **Feminine coded words**: committed, connected, cooperative, interpersonal, loyal, responsible, supportive, trustworthy.
-   **Neutral words**: assertive, authentic, collegial, critical, engaged, enthusiastic, passionate.

As a result, job adverts with many masculine coded words will attract fewer female candidates, company cultures that are described as competitive, result driven or hierarchical will be less appealing to women.

**Action items**
- Allow others to label themselves any way they choose (if they even want to label themselves). Consciously ask them about their gender identity.
- Amplify unheard voices : If women's contributions are invisible and overlooked, louden their voice by actively endorsing, mentioning, promoting, sponsoring, and advocating for them.

# Ethnic identity

-   **Ethnicity** or  **ethnic identity** groups people who share a distinctive cultural heritage, language, religion, origin, background, history, or a common set of traditions. It is a broad concept that can evolve over time.
-  **Race** is defined as a category of people with similar distinctive physical characteristics, such as skin color, facial structure, or hair texture. It needs to be seen in the context of history and economics.
	- “Ancestry” reflects the fact that human variations are connected to the **geographical origins** of our ancestors. Unlike the term “race,” it focuses on understanding how a person’s history unfolded, not how they fit into a specific category.
- **Racism** is a belief that race is a fundamental determinant of human traits and capacities and that racial differences produce an inherent superiority of a particular race.
	- **Ethnicity bias** is demonstrating a preference for or against a group of people sharing a common and distinctive racial, national, religious, linguistic, or cultural heritage.
		-  treated differently because of their ethnicity | assumption about someone based on their ethnicity
		- ethnicity is over-or underrepresented in your company
		- When they raise attention to inequality, they are not taken seriously or considered "difficult"
		- **Self-fulfilling prophecy** is when you make assumptions about what is going to happen.
		- **Tunnel vision** means you only see what you want to see.
### Red Flags
- It can be present in explicit racial insults, "jokes" and microaggressions.
- There are also more subtle expressions that sneak into workplace decisions regarding hiring, talent development and promotions.

- **Intersectionality** is the complex, **cumulative way** in which the effects of discrimination (such as racism, sexism, and classism) **combine, overlap, or intersect**.
	- Intersectionality helps us understand how one individual can be discriminated against or disadvantaged because of several different aspects of their identity, resulting in a unique position of accumulated discrimination.
	- Being color blind does not take away your unconscious bias and your prejudices, it can make you blind to the different realities of others.

**Action items**-
	-  Notice who speaks, and who isn't present when biased talk occurs. Notice code words for ethnicity. Notice implicit stereotypes.
	- It takes a lot of courage to talk about personal experiences of ethnicity bias. If someone is willing to share these with you, listen consciously and acknowledge their story.
	- If you witness ethnicity bias at work, speak up.

*To bring about change, you must not be afraid to take the first step. We will fail when we
fail to try.*- Rosa Parks

